# My PhD work: level set methods and weird fluid flow in rocks

One of the biggest events in my recent life was getting a PhD, though it's already been two years ago now. While I had to write a rather long dissertation about it, I figured my personal website is a good place to talk about what I did - my resume is nowhere adequate.

## What was it about?

In a nutshell, I studied fluid flow in the pore spaces in rocks. Why is this important? Well, fluid flow in rocks crops up its head in a variety of circumstances - the one of most concern to me was oil, gas and water in large hydrocarbon reservoirs. This has applications in hydrology, petroleum engineering, and other more general geoscience problems. Another important application is batteries, though the physics you worry about are quite different. 

I mainly wrote a lot of simulation code for my research, though I did flirt with doing some experimental work - and quickly discovered I am not wired for it. 

## What problem did I try to solve?

To put it generally, I was trying to quantify rock flow properties. For any kind of problem involving flow through natural rocks, one is usually worried about how much fluid is sitting in the rock, and how fast it can be made to get out. In the case of oil and gas engineers, they want to get it out as soon as possible, while others, like people interested in storing carbon dioxide underground or disposing of nuclear waste, want to make sure it doesn't get out. For both cases, you have to characterize the rocks, which is traditionally a slow and expensive process.

In my PhD, I tried to find ways to digitize the process. Using the same technology used to scan human bodies (medical CT), rocks can now be imaged at a micro-level (micro CT). These images can then be used in a physics simulator to try and calculate properties which are done in a lab in a more expensive, time-consuming way.

## A bit of gory detail

I used a very novel approach, pioneered by my PhD adviser, Dr Masa Prodanovic. It uses these methods called level set methods, which have been widely applied in biomedical image processing, and to a lesser extent in problems in fluid flow and solid deformation.





